HARI SREENIVASAN: Good evening.
I'm Hari Sreenivasan.
On the "NewsHour" tonight:
Republicans hold
a civil debate before next
week's crucial
primaries, while Ben Carson
becomes the second
former rival to endorse
front-runner Donald
Trump.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I'm Judy Woodruff
here at the
site of Nancy Reagan's funeral
in California,
where a nation said farewell to
an influential
first lady.
JAMES BAKER, Former U.S.
Secretary of State:
She had an instinct for reading
people that
the president knew he lacked.
"Nancy," he
wrote, "sees the goodness in
people, but she
also has an extra instinct that
allows her
to see the flaws."
HARI SREENIVASAN: It's Friday.
Mark Shields
and David Brooks are here to
analyze the week's
news.
Also ahead, Miles O'Brien's rare
look inside
Fukushima. Five years after the
meltdown,
the historic cleanup continues.
LAKE BARRETT, TEPCO Adviser: I
believe it
can be done. It can be done
safely and it
can be done successfully. But
nothing of this
magnitude has ever been done by
mankind.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All that and
more on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republican
candidates past
and present were out on the
stump today, all
eyes are on key states, like
Florida and Ohio,
set to vote in the primary on
Tuesday.
DONALD TRUMP (R), Presidential
Candidate:
I just want to introduce Dr. Ben
Carson, a
special, special person, a
special man.
Thank you very much.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Republican
front-runner
Donald Trump proudly presented
his latest
big-name endorsement in Palm
Beach this morning,
former rival Ben Carson.
BEN CARSON (R), Presidential
Candidate: There
are two different Donald Trumps.
There's the
one you see on the stage, and
there's the
one who is very cerebral, sits
there and considers
things very carefully. You can
have a very
good conversation with him. And
that's the
Donald Trump that you're going
to start seeing
more and more of.
DONALD TRUMP: Ben, thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump embraced
the endorsement
and said it was a sign
Republicans are getting
behind his campaign.
DONALD TRUMP: I have been
hearing from virtually
everybody in the Republican
Party, and they
are congratulating me. And they
are saying,
we're going to get together.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He was coming
off yet another
Republican debate, where the
tone shifted
to near civility, dialing back
on the bravado.
DONALD TRUMP: And so far, I
cannot believe
how civil it's been up here.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: But his rivals
weren't willing
to concede anything. Ohio
Governor John Kasich
leads in the polls in the
Buckeye State, one
of five holding their primaries
next Tuesday.
GOV. JOHN KASICH (R-OH),
Presidential Candidate:
Well, first of all, let's not --
you know,
math doesn't tell the whole
story in politics.
You have to earn the delegates
in order to
be picked. But let's not get
ahead of ourselves.
We don't know what's going to
happen, because
we still have about half the
delegates to
be selected. And that's what's
going to be
a very interesting thing to see
how it all
turns out as we move forward
over the next
couple of weeks.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Texas Senator
Ted Cruz argued
only he has the chance to beat
Trump.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
There are only two of us that
have a path
to winning the nomination,
Donald and myself.
At this point, I have roughly
360 delegates.
He has about 100 more than I
have. We have
at this point beaten Donald in
eight separate
states all over the country
DONALD TRUMP: I watch Ted on
television and
when he speaks, and he's always
saying, "I'm
the only one that beat Donald in
six contests,
and I beat him."
But I beat him in 13 contests.
He never mentions
that.
(CHEERING AND APPLAUSE)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump also
responded to
violence against protesters at
his rallies,
including one assault caught on
videotape
Wednesday.
JAKE TAPPER, CNN: Some of your
critics point
to quotes that you have made at
these debates
-- at these rallies, including
February 23,
"I would like to punch him in
the face," referring
to a protester, February 27, "In
the good
old days, they'd have ripped him
out of that
seat so fast," February 1,
"Knock the crap
out of him, would, you?
Seriously, OK, just
knock the hell -- I promise you
I will pay
for the legal fees. I promise, I
promise."
HARI SREENIVASAN: Trump didn't
condone the
violence, but said:
DONALD TRUMP: We had a couple
big, strong,
powerful guys doing damage to
people, not
only the loudness -- the
loudness, I don't
mind -- but doing serious
damage. And if they
have got to be taken out, I --
to be honest,
I mean, we have to run
something.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And today at
Trump's rally
in Saint Louis, protesters
employed a new
tactic, staggering their
interruptions one
at a time throughout Trump's
remarks.
DONALD TRUMP: We better get our
country going,
folks, because that's the kind
of stuff -- it's
taking us down. It's taking us
down fast.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Florida
Senator Marco Rubio
urged voters to consider the
impact of their
choices on Tuesday and how to
vote in both
his home state and in Ohio.
SEN. MARCO RUBIO (R-FL),
Presidential Candidate:
If a voter in Ohio is motivated
by stopping
Donald Trump and comes to the
conclusion that
John Kasich is the only one who
can beat him
there, then I expect that is the
decision
they will make. I can tell you
that, in Florida,
I'm the only one that can stop
Donald Trump,
and whether someone supports Ted
Cruz or John
Kasich,, if you vote for them in
Florida,
you're in essence voting for
Donald Trump.
And if a voter reaches the same
conclusion
in Ohio, then I think that's
what they're
going to do as well.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Without wins
in their home
states, Rubio and Kasich face
the end of the
road for their runs.
Meanwhile, on the Democratic
side, Vermont
Senator Bernie Sanders courted
voters in North
Carolina, Ohio and Illinois.
But former Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton
put aside campaigning today to
attend the
funeral of fellow first lady
Nancy Reagan
in California.
We will get Mark Shields and
David Brooks'
take on the state of the
presidential race
later in the program.
In the day's other news, there
was little
relief for the residents in
flood-stricken
South, as overnight downpours
brought total
rainfall to two feet in some
places. In Monroe,
Louisiana one of the hardest-hit
communities,
floodwaters caused major damage,
uprooting
trees and collapsing roads.
Meanwhile, the National Weather
Service warned
more rain is on the way this
weekend. Some
places along the Alabama coast
could see six
additional inches.
The U.N. warned today, South
Sudan has become
one of the most horrendous human
rights situations
in the world. The new report
detailed atrocities
by government forces, including
cases of children
and disabled people being burned
alive and
parents forced to watch as their
children
were raped.
The country has been mired in a
civil war
since 2013, leaving tens of
thousands dead
and millions more displaced.
I spoke with David Marshall,
coordinator of
a U.N. human rights mission to
South Sudan,
via Skype earlier today.
DAVID MARSHALL, U.N. Coordinator
for South
Sudan: Our findings were quite
stark, that
war crimes and crimes against
humanity have
been perpetrated in 2015 by the
government.
The government has instilled or
undertaken
a campaign of terror in the
country to displace,
kill, rape, loot and destroy
civilian property.
HARI SREENIVASAN: To see our
full interview
with David Marshall on the
atrocities in South
Sudan, visit our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
The number of North Korean
cyber-attacks on
the South have doubled over the
past month.
South Korean intelligence
officials sounded
that warning today to
parliamentary lawmakers.
They said the North tried, but
failed to hack
into their railway control
system and computer
networks of financial
institutions. The hackers
also stole information from the
smartphones
of dozens of South Korean
officials.
President Obama nominated U.S.
Army General
Curtis Scaparrotti to be NATO's
new top military
commander. Scaparrotti,
currently commander
of U.S. forces in South Korea,
will succeed
U.S. Air Force General Philip
Breedlove as
NATO's supreme allied commander
of Europe.
The nomination, pending Senate
approval, comes
amid ongoing tensions with
Russia and a refugee
crisis plaguing Europe.
A South African man says his son
may have
found a piece of missing
Malaysia Airlines
Flight 370 in Mozambique. The
teenager found
the part on December 30 in the
town of Xai-Xai,
thousands of miles from the
flight's last
known coordinates. The piece has
a five-digit
number on it, which authorities
said indicates
it may belong to a Boeing 777.
Officials are
sending it to Australia to be
examined.
In Japan today, mourners marked
the fifth
anniversary of the 2011
earthquake and tsunami
that killed more than 18,000
people. The country's
northeast coastline was
devastated, and still
hasn't been fully rebuilt.
Japanese officials, including
Prime Minister
Shinzo Abe, held a moment of
silence in Tokyo.
He struck a positive tone in a
speech at the
altar for victims.
SHINZO ABE, Japanese Prime
Minister (through
translator): In the past, our
nation suffered
countless disasters that could
be described
as national crises, but overcame
them each
time with determination and
hope. I vow once
again that we will follow hand
in hand in
the footsteps of our forefathers
and continue
to move forward.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The
anniversary also sparked
protests against nuclear power,
after the
meltdown at the Fukushima
Daiichi power plant.
We will have more on the cleanup
efforts there
later in the program tonight.
The Department of Health and
Human Services
pledged $94 million to help
fight against
heroin and opioid drug abuse.
The money will
go to 271 centers across the
country and be
used to treat roughly 124,000
new patients.
It comes a day after the Senate
overwhelmingly
passed a bill to help state and
local programs,
but that measure didn't include
any new funds.
The world anti-doping agency
announced there
have been 99 positive tests for
meldonium
this year. That includes Russian
tennis star
Maria Sharapova's sample. The
blood-flow-boosting
drug was banned on January 1 for
its performance-enhancing
benefits. Sharapova admitted
she's been taking
it for a decade for health
issues, but didn't
know it had been banned.
At least seven of the confirmed
cases come
from Russian athletes. Those who
test positive
face up to a four-year ban.
Stocks closed higher on Wall
Street today
to round out a four-week rally.
The Dow Jones
industrial average gained 218
points to close
at 17213. The Nasdaq rose 86
points, and the
S&P 500 gained 32. For the week,
the Dow and
the S&P gained more than a
percent. The Nasdaq
rose just under a percent.
And after his year in space,
astronaut Scott
Kelly has announced his
retirement. NASA said
he will retire on April 1. Kelly
worked for
NASA for nearly 20 years. Kelly
also holds
the American record for the most
cumulative
time in space at 520 days.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
first lady
Nancy Reagan laid to rest; Mark
Shields and
David Brooks analyze the week in
news; the
cleanup continues five years
after the Fukushima
nuclear plant disaster; and much
more.
There were recollections and
prayers today
for first lady Nancy Reagan at
her funeral
service held in the hill country
northwest
of Los Angeles.
Family, friends and first ladies
past and
present were in attendance, as
well as President
George W. Bush.
Here are some excerpts from
today's service
at the Reagan Presidential
Library.
JAMES BAKER, Former U.S.
Secretary of State:
We gather here today to say
goodbye to Nancy
Davis Reagan, a beautiful, smart
and gracious
woman, a woman who captured the
heart of a
man who loved his craft, his
country, and
his countrymen, and most
especially loved
this remarkable woman, a woman
without whom
Ronald Wilson Reagan would never
have become
the 40th president of the United
States or
succeeded as well as he did.
She had an instinct for reading
people that
the president knew he lacked.
"Nancy," he
wrote, "sees the goodness in
people, but she
also has an extra instinct that
allows her
to see the flaws."
The only time I saw her lose her
composure
was the day the president was
shot. She was
devastated and, in fact, she
fell apart. President
Reagan left the hospital
convinced that God
had spared him for a special
purpose. And
the first lady left with a
fierce determination
to protect him in every way that
she possibly
could.
Ronald and Nancy Reagan were
defined by their
love for each other. They were
as close to
being one person as it is
possible for any
two people to be.
PATTI DAVIS, Daughter of Nancy
Reagan: My
parents were two halves of a
circle closed
tight around a world in which
their love for
each other was the only
sustenance they needed.
While they might venture out and
include others
in their orbit, no one truly
crossed the boundary
into the space they held as
theirs.
It's no secret that my mother
and I had a
challenging and often
contentious relationship.
Our emotions burned up the color
chart. Nothing
was ever gray. But there were
moments in our
history when all that was going
on between
us was love. I choose to
remember those moments.
RON REAGAN, Son of Nancy Reagan:
And, today,
my mother comes to rest on this
lovely hilltop
with its far-reaching views next
to her beloved
Ronald Reagan Library.
And, by the way, from here, she
will be able
to keep an eye on things.
Most importantly, she will once
again lay
down beside the man who was the
love of her
life, the one she loved until
the end of her
days.
They will watch the sun drop
over the hills
in the west toward the sea, and,
as night
falls, they will look out across
the valley.
My father will tell her that the
lights below
are her jewels. The moon and
stars will endlessly
turn overhead, and here they
will stay, as
they always wished it to be,
resting in each
other's arms, only each other's
arms, until
the end of time.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Judy Woodruff
attended the
service today, and she joins me
now from Simi
Valley.
Judy, your thoughts on what
happened.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, Hari, it's
raining now,
but the sun was shining brightly
as this funeral
service unfolded here at the
Reagan -- Ronald
Reagan Library in Simi Valley.
It was the most beautifully
choreographed
funeral, if you want to put it
that way, that
one could imagine. The flowers
on the casket
were spectacular. The crowd was
full of celebrities
and people who served in the
Reagan administration,
a number of influential
Republicans.
The service was poignant and it
was funny.
There were a lot of funny
stories about Nancy
and Ronald Reagan and how close
they were.
All in all, it was classic Nancy
Reagan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And, Judy,
Nancy had a lot
to do in the planning and
orchestrating who
would do what at this ceremony,
right?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Exactly.
The people -- people who know
her said this
-- again, this was just like
what you would
expect from the former first
lady. She was
close to her husband. She wanted
to make sure
everything was perfect for her
husband, and
she carried that on through the
rest of her
life until his death a little
over 10 years
ago.
And she felt the same way about
her legacy,
because she saw it connected to
his, so she
wanted today's ceremony, this
service to reflect
the two of them, and that's
really what it
was. It was planned to the T, to
the program,
to who the speakers were, the
music, the minister,
everything, in a spectacular
setting here
in the Santa Lucia Mountains in
California.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Was this a
reunion of Reagan
administration staff or were
there people
from across the aisle as well?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there were
both, the
Reagan administration
represented by Secretary
of State James Baker, people
like Ed Meese,
who were part of the Reagan
White House, so
many of the press corps who
covered the Reagan
White House, as I did.
It was a collection of the
Reagan family,
in addition to the staff and the
press. But
there were Democrats here as
well. We saw
-- in fact, I saw Vicki Kennedy,
the widow
of senator Ted Kennedy, here,
and a number
of others.
So it wasn't, I would say, a
partisan event,
but it was very -- it was heavy
on Republicans,
which is exactly what you would
expect from
the widow of this president who
represented
the Republican -- a Republican
icon.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Judy, I want
to bring syndicated columnist
Mark Shields
and New York Times columnist
David Brooks
in on this conversation.
Mark, your thoughts on the
passing of Nancy
Reagan? This happened after we
taped the show
last week.
MARK SHIELDS: Just to add -- to
fill out the
point about being bipartisan,
Governor Jerry
Brown was there, whose dad
Ronald Reagan had
defeated to become governor in
1966, the current
governor, then Democrat of
California, along
with Rosalynn Carter, the first
lady, and
as well as, of course, Hillary
Clinton, the
former first lady and
front-runner for the
Democratic nomination.
But Nancy Reagan, the irony to
me is that
Ronald Reagan is the first of
the 44 presidents
and only divorced man ever
elected, and yet
they are remembered as a couple,
an incredibly
devoted couple, for better, for
worse, in
sickness and health couple. She
was a formidable
presence.
I mean, I had met her. I didn't
know her.
Judy knew her well. But she was
a formidable
force in personnel choice in the
administration,
in the White House.
And she was responsible for what
may have
been Ronald Reagan's, in many
respects, most
important hire, that of Jim
Baker, as chief
of staff, who had run,
ironically, the first
-- the last two campaigns
against Ronald Reagan,
that of George H.W. Bush in 1980
for the nomination,
for Gerald Ford in 1976, even.
Later -- but she reached across.
She recognized
talent and thought it was in the
best interest
of Ronnie, her Ronnie, as she
called him,
to have Jim Baker. And I think
it was a wise
decision.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes. I am reminded
of the Tom
Cruise line that "You complete
me."
They really did complete each
other. And that
was also for better or worse. It
was such
a self-enclosed, a beautiful
love, a tremendously
fulfilling love for both of
them. But they
sort of completed each other's
emotional needs.
And so some people were shut
out. And Patti
Davis and some of the Reagan
staff thought
they were shut out from that.
And along with
that love was a ferocity, as
Mark said, a
protectiveness.
And I have noticed, in all first
ladies, they
are always more aggressive on
behalf of their
husbands than the presidents are
themselves.
They're always the tougher
presence in the
White House. They're willing to
get rid of
people. And Nancy Reagan was
certainly willing
to get rid of people who were
not serving,
she felt, her husband well.
But it was the power of her love
and the grace
of her presence. I'm not
surprised to hear
what Judy said. If you remember
those state
dinners in the Reagan years,
they were always
extremely glamorous for the
Republicans. And
she was sort of the architect of
those.
MARK SHIELDS: She liked being
first lady.
She liked Washington. And it
came through.
I mean, we in Washington, the
permanent Washington,
whatever we are, we tire of
people who spend
time, effort, energy and
millions of dollars
to get here to tell us how much
they hate
it and how unhappy they are
here. She really
was happy as first lady.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Judy, was
there a moment
that stood out for you?
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, there were
several.
I'm listening to David and Mark
speak about
the relationship between the
Reagans. They
were as close -- I think Jim
Baker said it
here -- as close as two people
could be and
not be one person.
And the point about their circle
of closeness
was so impenetrable, in the
words of their
son Ron Reagan, that no one else
could get
through, including their
children. And that
came through in a very poignant
way in what
both children said about how
they felt -- they
loved their parents, but they
knew who came
first, and that was their
parents. It was
the president and the first
lady.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
Judy, thanks
so much. We will see you back
here on Monday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: See you then.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right,
well, let's continue
the conversation about the week
in politics.
Last night's GOP debate could
have possibly
been on PBS. It was definitely a
different
tone, a different vibe.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Why do you
think that was?
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, Alistair
Cooke as actually
moderating it.
(LAUGHTER)
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
I think it was because the other
candidates
decided, especially Marco Rubio,
that if they
go after Trump the way they
were, personally,
just in the gutter, that they
end up hurting
themselves. And I think there is
some evidence
for Rubio to that effect.
And so it was a more Rubio-style
debate. And
I thought he did well, because
it was a substantive
debate. It was more uplifting.
And he did
well, but not substantially well
enough to
change the nature of the race, I
don't think.
MARK SHIELDS: Not for the first
time observed
that the campaigns -- or
campaigns are like
parallel skiing.
That is, you're competing in
Ohio, while your
opponents are in Tampa, Florida,
or Dearborn,
Michigan, and a debate brings
you all together.
This is the chance for you to
rearrange the
standing, especially if you're
behind.
And last night, there was none
of that. I
mean, rather than PBS, I would
say it was
C-SPAN subcommittee hearings on
the Subcommittee
on Weights and Measures. It was
about that
stimulating, instead of the past
debates,
which have been like the
housewives of the
Jersey Shore, and you turn them
on expecting
for someone to throw a household
appliance
at the other.
And I think -- to some degree, I
think David's
right. They found out that it
didn't work.
It has worked for Donald Trump,
but it doesn't
work to be a mini-Trump, as
Marco Rubio proved.
But I think, Hari, that may be
the opening
admission, acknowledgment that
Donald Trump
is going to be the nominee,
because if you
pass up a chance to really take
a shot and
to try and change the chemistry
and the dynamic
of the race -- and you don't get
that many
opportunities, where everybody
is watching
at the same time.
I think the failure of people to
engage Trump
last night, almost an admission,
may be the
beginning of the concession.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about what's at stake coming up
Tuesday with
Ohio and Florida, two big
otherwise general
battleground states.
Yesterday, there were comments
made on stage
by Donald Trump saying, look,
two of us have
the possibility here, two of us
don't.
Is that basically the case in
terms of Governor
Kasich and Marco Rubio? If they
don't win
their home states, do they pack
up?
DAVID BROOKS: Rubio probably
does.
You know, if they win their home
states, then
Donald Trump has to get nearly
60 percent
of the remaining delegates, or
nearly 70 percent
of the remaining delegates, and
that's a tall
order.
And so if they win there , if
Kasich and Rubio
win, then we're looking at going
into the
convention without at least a
clear nominee.
If they lose, I think Rubio
probably has to
get out. You get the sense, just
the vibe
this week that the air is a
little popping
out of his campaign, a bad,
really bad event
in the football stadium, and
just a lot of
Republicans sort of walking
away.
Kasich, on the other hand, maybe
because he
started lower, he's still got
some energy
around his campaign. And so I
think he can
lose and hang in there. If it
was he, Cruz
and Trump, Kasich was suddenly
-- a lot of
people might go to him.
If Trump wins them both, then he
will probably
win them all on Tuesday. And
it's just the
biggest day of the season. And
then you would
have to think he's probably the
nominee.
MARK SHIELDS: Yes, John Kasich
is an interesting
one.
He's run a positive campaign,
the governor
of Ohio, and has not got into
the back and
forth and the insult exchange
that has dominated
most of the Republican debates.
For the first
time, Donald Trump is running an
anti-Kasich
commercial in Ohio, and it will
be interesting
to see what John Kasich does in
the next few
days between now and then.
Does he take it ®MD+IT /MDNM /in
just passive,
in pacifist fashion, or does he
hit back?
It's obviously an invitation.
Trump wants
to win Ohio. What he has going
for him right
now is Urban Meyer, the coach at
Ohio State,
perhaps the most -- football
coach at Ohio
State -- perhaps the most
popular figure in
the state.
If it isn't an endorsement, it's
certainly
an embrace, a TV spot that he's
cut with John
Kasich and John Kasich's family,
speaking
very glowingly of qualities John
Kasich's
mother had not been aware he had
probably
before.
(LAUGHTER)
(CROSSTALK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Does John
Kasich go into
the convention -- let's --
there's probably
mathematically not a way that
he's going to
outscore Trump and Cruz in terms
of delegates.
But when he goes into that
convention, what
does he do there? Is this a
matter of saying,
hey, it's open and I think I'm
still a viable
candidate, and, by that time,
people will
see me as the guy that they want
to nominate?
DAVID BROOKS: Well, let's play
it out.
If Trump doesn't have a majority
of the delegates,
then I think there will be --
and they can
sort of rewrite the rules. I
think there will
be a period pre-nominate --
pre-convention
where the candidates will be
going after the
delegates, Republican, and
saying, commit,
commit, commit, commit to me.
And they are going to try, all
the candidates,
to win those delegates over. And
then it just
becomes a bidding war. And it
will all be
quiet. And then they will try to
commit before
we even get to the convention.
And I suspect
most of the delegates will lie
and they will
say, yes, Mr. Trump, I'm with
you, yes, Mr.
Cruz, I'm with you, too.
And so then it's all -- then we
don't know
what happens. Then it's complete
chaos.
MARK SHIELDS: I don't know how
John Kasich
goes after Ohio.
I mean, I don't know where he
mounts a campaign
that makes him a competitor, a
serious challenger
for the nomination. I mean, he
can certainly
go to the convention, which is
in Cleveland,
and having carried Ohio, if he
does so. That's
not unimpressive by any means.
But if Trump is within 100
delegates of the
nomination, he will get them. I
have seen
candidates. Candidates get 100
delegates,
100 people who want to be --
they know that
your -- chance to be the next
president of
the United States or certainly
the nominee
of your party. And they want to
be in the
good side of such a nominee. I
have just -- I
have seen it in the past.
DAVID BROOKS: Maybe with 100,
but Trump is
a unique candidate.
There is more opposition to
Trump. I have
just felt it all week, so many
people. You
go to them, some members of
Congress, some
just activists.
MARK SHIELDS: I agree. Yes.
DAVID BROOKS: And you say, could
you support
Trump? And they say, I just
couldn't. I just
couldn't pull the lever.
And so there's -- he's unique in
that regard.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Let's talk a
little bit
about the other side.
Why, Mark, is this race on the
Democratic
side still continuing? I mean,
conventional
wisdom was that Hillary Clinton
would have
a formidable lead, she would be
the clear
and distant choice, but, in
cases like Michigan,
not so.
MARK SHIELDS: No.
I mean, when -- a Sanders person
pointed out
to me, you take out the red
states of Alabama,
Mississippi, South Carolina,
Louisiana, Georgia,
Arkansas, and Bernie is doing
pretty darn
well. I mean, that's where
Secretary Clinton
has run up the score, and done
so well with
large African-American votes in
those states.
But Bernie -- Bernie Sanders was
billed as
being 21 points behind in the
polling. The
primary polling has brought a
new respectability
to astrology.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: It was so wrong in
Michigan.
But I just think you have to
come back. It's
not the messenger. He's not a
charismatic
guy that bobby-soxers are
swooning in front
of. It's the message. And you
can see it.
Now, for the first time, you see
Republican
voters in the exit polls, in
addition to Democrats,
saying that they oppose free
trade.
They see free trade as
outsourcing of jobs.
They see it as offshoring, so
not in their
economic and family's interest.
So, Bernie
-- it's Bernie's message.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes.
Even John Kasich was sounding
like Dick Gephardt
on trade and the issues. The
whole debate
has shifted over on that side. I
think it's
also her weakness as a
candidate.
She sometimes has a good
message, but, on
attack, we were reminded this
week she's really
not good. She just attacks
wildly, without
focus, and I think
unpersuasively.
I -- the one thing I really like
that she
did this week was confess the
vulnerability:
I'm not my husband. I'm not
Barack Obama.
I'm not a politician like them.
MARK SHIELDS: As politically
gifted. That's
right, yes.
DAVID BROOKS: Yes, just not as
politically
gifted as those guys.
And I think that's a true thing,
but also
a nice and honest way to
approach the American
people.
MARK SHIELDS: That's a good
point.
HARI SREENIVASAN: All right, New
York Times
columnist David Brooks,
syndicated columnist
Mark Shields, thanks so much for
joining us.
MARK SHIELDS: Thank you, Hari.
DAVID BROOKS: Thank you.
HARI SREENIVASAN: And you can
get Mark and
David delivered to your inbox
every Friday.
Sign up for "NewsHour"'s
politics e-mails
by clicking the Subscribe icon
on our home
page. That's at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Now: How do you rebuild from a
cascade of
disasters?
Five years ago today, Japan was
rocked by
a massive earthquake and a
catastrophic tsunami.
The Fukushima Daiichi nuclear
plant was crippled
by the tremors and waves,
triggering a meltdown
that forced roughly 100 thousand
people from
their homes, spewing radioactive
material
into the ocean and nearby
countryside.
Science correspondent Miles
O'Brien has a
rare look inside Fukushima to
see how the
massive cleanup project is
pressing forward.
His report is a partnership with
PBS program
"NOVA."
MILES O'BRIEN: Fukushima Daiichi
was one of
the largest nuclear power plants
in the world.
Today, it is a busy, crowded,
dangerous deconstruction
site.
My invitation to see it up close
was unique.
What next? Does three have a lot
to...
But even with special
permission, getting
inside is not easy by design.
Radioactive
contamination levels have gone
down, but not
nearly enough to dispense with
the Tyvek suits,
three layers of socks and gloves
and full
face respirators.
It's like being an astronaut on
a space walk.
Here, 7,000 workers are doing a
job for which
there is no playbook.
NAOHIRO MASUDA, TEPCO (through
translator):
What makes this so difficult is
the lack of
experience. Nobody in the world
has done this
before.
MILES O'BRIEN: Naohiro Masuda is
the chief
decommissioning officer for the
Tokyo Electric
Power Company, TEPCO.
NAOHIRO MASUDA (through
translator): We still
need to decide what we're even
going to do.
For that, we need to rely on the
knowledge
of people all around the world.
MILES O'BRIEN: He relies heavily
on this man.
LAKE BARRETT, TEPCO Adviser: For
them to come
out and to publicly say "We need
help" is
different for them.
MILES O'BRIEN: Lake Barrett is
one of a very
select group who has some
experience with
a job like this. He was the
Nuclear Regulatory
Commission manager in charge of
the decommissioning
of Three Mile Island Unit 2 near
Harrisburg,
Pennsylvania. It melted down in
1979.
LAKE BARRETT: Fukushima is much
more complex.
The damage is much greater.
There's three
melted cores. But the
fundamentals of how
you address this and how you
recover are similar.
MILES O'BRIEN: The daily details
of this 40-year
job are managed here in a
radiation-shielded,
earthquake-proof emergency
operations center.
The superintendent is another
TEPCO veteran,
Akira Ono, on duty here since
June of 2013.
AKIRA ONO, TEPCO (through
translator): Ever
since the disaster, we have been
working here
24 hours a day 365 days a year.
We're ready
to respond to anything that
happens.
MILES O'BRIEN: His biggest
problem is water,
a steady torrent of radioactive
water. When
rain falls, it seeps into the
soil, and flows
toward the ocean.
The earthquake on March 11,
2011, created
numerous breaches in the
basements of the
reactor buildings. The
groundwater is contaminated
after it mixes with water that
is continuously
pumped onto the damaged reactor
cores; 100,000
gallons of newly tainted water
is created
here each and every day.
They capture and pump most of it
into holding
tanks, lots of tanks. They build
one about
every other day. A plateau above
the destroyed
reactors is now a tank farm,
brimming with
more than 1,000 of them.
But have they managed to stop
all the radioactive
water from leaking into the
ocean?
KEN BUESSELER, Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution:
What we're hoping to find is a
container full
of water.
MILES O'BRIEN: In this lab at
the Woods Hole
Oceanographic Institution, they
have been
tracking radioactive water from
Fukushima
since the accident.
KEN BUESSELER: The level is
still measurable
and quite elevated, but it's not
anywhere
near what it was at the peak of
the accident.
MILES O'BRIEN: Oceanographer Ken
Buesseler
says readings in April of 2011
showed cesium
levels 50 million times higher
than normal
at the plant.
KEN BUESSELER: The numbers
dropped very quickly,
but they also didn't go down to
zero. They
didn't go to the background as
quick as you
would expect if they had stopped
the leaks.
MILES O'BRIEN: They hope to stop
the toxic
leaks by building a barrier.
They have encircled
the damaged reactors with 1,500
pipes that
go 100-feet deep. They will be
filled with
coolant. The goal? Deep-freeze
the soil, creating
a mile-long water barrier.
The technique has long been used
in construction
to build tunnels. But can it
work at this
scale for years and years?
®MDNM /Dale Klein is a former
U.S. nuclear
regulatory commission chairman
and now an
adviser to TEPCO.
®MDNM /DALE KLEIN, TEPCO Adviser:
If you
have water flowing through the
site and you
build a barricade, water's going
to go somewhere.
Do they really understand? Is it
going to
go over the wall? Is it going to
go under
the wall? Is it going to go
around the wall?
So, my concern is, there is
probably a better
way to do it.
MILES O'BRIEN: The long-term
solution is to
find and remove the uranium fuel
from the
four reactors affected. They
have started
the process by removing fuel
that was in underwater
storage.
At unit four, which was powered
down when
the tsunami hit, they built a
structure over
the damaged reactor, using it as
a platform
to carefully pluck out more than
1,500 fuel
assemblies.
But in units one, two and three,
where the
reactor cores all melted down,
radiation levels
are much higher, making the task
much more
daunting.
LAKE BARRETT: People are
probably not going
to have access to those
buildings for more
than maybe minutes or two, so
not enough to
do defueling.
MILES O'BRIEN: And what about
the melted fuel
in the reactor cores? They
aren't even sure
where it all is.
LAKE BARRETT: Is it in one big
vertical lump
on the floor underneath it, or
did it come
down and flow like lava in a
volcano and move
out to the sides? We don't know
yet.
MILES O'BRIEN: TEPCO has turned
to a team
of scientists and engineers from
the Los Alamos
National Laboratory for some
assistance. They
are helping build a device
designed to see
through the walls of the reactor
buildings
and hopefully make what looks
like three-dimensional
X-rays of the reactor cores.
These long cylinders are able to
detect muons,
subatomic particles created in
space by quasars
and supernovas that rain down on
Earth. Muons
are stopped, slowed or deflected
depending
on the density of the matter
they are passing
through. And uranium is very
dense.
Physicist Chris Morris leads the
team.
CHRIS MORRIS, Los Alamos
National Laboratory:
You can reconstruct the amount
of material
at the core in the reactor. And
we can actually
measure if there's any uranium
there, if there's
a lot of uranium there, how much
is left.
MILES O'BRIEN: The detectors
will be run for
months to give engineers the
sharpest possible
picture inside a very hazardous
place.
CHRIS MORRIS: Human beings
aren't going in
there anytime soon. The
radiation levels are
very high. It kills robots.
MILES O'BRIEN: The robots they
have tried
here so far have offered up
glimpses inside
the melted nuclear cores, before
failing in
the face of a bombardment of
radiation.
Japanese robotics engineers have
their work
cut out for them.
LAKE BARRETT: I believe it can
be done. It
can be done safely and it can be
done successfully.
But nothing of this magnitude
has ever been
done by mankind.
NAOHIRO MASUDA (through
translator): I feel
very reassured that, in the next
30 or 40
years, people from all over the
world will
gather in Fukushima to work and
research the
decommissioning. I'm hoping it
will become
a very lively place.
MILES O'BRIEN: Fukushima five
years later,
they have made progress here,
but it is just
the beginning of a marathon.
This cleanup
will rely on technology not yet
invented,
and the determination of people
not yet born.
Miles O'Brien, the "PBS
NewsHour," Futaba,
Japan.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Stay tuned
this fall. Miles
will have a new documentary on
Fukushima for
"NOVA." And, right now, you can
read his blog
on the real heroes behind the
nuclear disaster.
That's on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
HARI SREENIVASAN: We will be
back with a look
at how Syrians artists are
depicting their
experiences of the ongoing civil
war.
But, first, take this moment to
hear from
your local PBS station. It's a
chance to offer
your support, which helps keep
programs like
ours on the air.
(BREAK)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Fighting in
Syria continues
into its fifth year. As the
death toll grows
and cities are destroyed, Syrian
artists,
many of them forced to flee
their country,
have sought ways to respond.
In recent months, we have
profiled a number
of these artists in our online
Art Beat series
Syrian Voices.
Jeffrey Brown has our look.
JEFFREY BROWN: A horror story
told in one
minute, that's the idea behind
"Fade to Black,"
a short film by Amer Albarzawi,
who shows
us what's happened in Syria
through the changing
image of Farah Brisly, an
actress from Damascus
who now lives in Istanbul.
It's just one of the ways Syrian
artists have
responded to the destruction in
their country.
In a refugee camp in Lebanon,
Farah's sister,
Diala, has found another,
working with Syrian
children to design and painting
murals with
them to bring some color and joy
to their
lives.
Diala spoke to us by Skype from
her home in
Beirut.
DIALA BRISLY, Lebanon: Most of
them, they
skip school for two or three
years. And they
had to work in the farms to help
their families.
So, they have really very, very
serious life
that doesn't belong to a
childhood, you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: The work on the
murals, she
says, begins with a
brainstorming session
as she asks them to imagine what
seems impossible,
like flying.
DIALA BRISLY: I tell them, like,
you can use
your imagination. It isn't
supposed to be
realistic. You can imagine
anything.
Some of them, they think of
butterflies, of
birds, of air balloons, things
like this.
So, after that, I take this
illustration and
I get inspired by it, and I
start designing
the mural. And the day after,
they come to
help me in filling the colors in
these murals.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another artist, a
very different
kind of imagery.
Waseem Al-Marzouki documents the
history of
the Syrian conflict through
intricate, large-scale
paintings and films that depict
military and
industrial images and symbols.
He grew up
near Raqqa, now the stronghold
of the Islamic
State, and now lives and works
in Los Angeles.
He told us the war had left him
unable to
work for a two-year period.
WASEEM AL-MARZOUKI, Artist: I
was very shocked
from what I see and what we have
experienced,
killing, displacement, torture,
all these
things happening to us. And,
yes, so, after
two years, I start working
again, but I realize
that what I'm doing is totally
different than
what I have done before. It's
more related
to what we are facing.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another voice,
that of poetry,
which has always had an honored
place in Arabic
culture.
Ghada Alatrash is a Syrian
writer and translator
now earning a doctorate at the
University
of Calgary in Canada.
GHADA ALATRASH,
Writer/Translator: Syrian
poetry today is an outcry. It is
a plea to
humanity. It embodies that human
tragedy,
the raw pain, the loss and the
defeat.
JEFFREY BROWN: Alatrash is from
Sweida, in
the south of Syria, and has
translated the
work of Najat Abdul Samad, a
friend who remains
in their shared hometown. She
read us the
beginning of the poem "When I Am
Overcome
With Weakness."
GHADA ALATRASH: "When I am
overcome with weakness,
I bandage my heart with a Syrian
woman's patience
in adversity. I bandage it with
December's
frozen tree roots, trees that
have sworn to
blossom in March or April."
JEFFREY BROWN: And then there is
this, a documentary
titled "The Cow Farm," about a
farmer on the
outskirts of Salamiyah.
Filmmaker Ali Sheikh Khudr told
us that, when
the revolution began, many
rushed to capture
protests and the political
upheaval. He decided
to tell a different kind of
story, one about
Hassan, his own cousin, who
supported the
regime.
Khoo'-dur, a strong opponent,
said he was
after complexities, seeking to
understand
why people like Hassan sided
with the government.
ALI SHEIKH KHUDR, Filmmaker:
There's a lot
of people just -- they just
didn't want to
lose the things that they have.
They didn't
want to lose their future, they
didn't want
to lose their lives, they didn't
want to lose
in the country itself. They were
very afraid.
And they stood on one side
against the other.
So, you have -- on both sides,
you have people
who are afraid, you know?
JEFFREY BROWN: Khudr's cousin
Hassan died
in 2013 fighting for the
government. Khudr
himself moved to Berlin.
He says that, above all, he
feels a responsibility
to share the stories of Syrians
whose lives
have changed forever.
ALI SHEIKH KHUDR: The first
responsibility
was for me that there should be
a film, a
documentary film from Syria
telling something
different, a new perspective,
you know?
And there was also this second
level of responsibility
that I should take out this
story. People
who are dying in Syria are not
numbers. They
are human beings and they have
lives, they
have memories, they have dreams,
and that
was lost.
JEFFREY BROWN: Khudr and other
artists we
talked to are determined not to
let these
people's stories fade to black.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Jeffrey Brown.
HARI SREENIVASAN: You
can find much more on these and
other artists
in our Syrian Voices series on
Art Beat at
HARI SREENIVASAN: You
can find much more on these and
other artists
in our Syrian Voices series on
Art Beat at
PBS.org/NewsHour.
Also on the "NewsHour" online:
You have heard
Donald Trump tout his fine wines
in victory
Also on the "NewsHour" online:
You have heard
Donald Trump tout his fine wines
in victory
speeches, but what's really
behind this luxury
brand? We traveled to the Trump
winery in
Charlottesville, Virginia, where
we talked
to visitors who were interested
in the candidate's
politics and his pinot noir.
Read more about
our visit and see photos on our
home page.
politics and his pinot noir.
Read more about
our visit and see photos on our
home page.
And there is more Shields and
Brooks. I spoke
with them earlier today about
the sport of
politics and the politics of
sport. Find and
that many more behind-the-scenes
videos, including
a conversation with Shortwave
producer P.J.
Tobia on the challenges of
keeping products
that rely on slave labor off of
U.S. shelves.
Find all those on our Facebook
page. All that
and more is on our Web site as
well, PBS.org/NewsHour.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
And a reminder about some
upcoming programs
from our PBS colleagues.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening.
Gwen Ifill is preparing for
"Washington Week,"
which airs later this evening.
Here's a preview:
GWEN IFILL: We tee up a critical
week in
the 2016 election, as Florida
and Ohio could
shrink the Republican field and
seal the deal
GWEN IFILL: We tee up a critical
week in
the 2016 election, as Florida
and Ohio could
shrink the Republican field and
seal the deal
for the leading Democrat. The
candidates turned
to substance, talking about the
Middle East,
for the leading Democrat. The
candidates turned
to substance, talking about the
Middle East,
trade deals and immigration,
instead about
each other. How refreshing. We
trade deals and immigration,
instead about
each other. How refreshing. We
will
talk about it all tonight on
"Washington Week"
-- Hari.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Tomorrow on
"PBS NewsHour
Weekend": a report on babies
born going through
drug withdrawal at birth because
their mothers
were addicted to opioid
painkillers and heroin
during their pregnancies.
And we will be back right here
on Monday with
John Yang's report from the
battleground state
of Ohio, ahead of their critical
primary vote.
That's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm Hari
Sreenivasan.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.
Have a great weekend. Thank you,
and good
night.